And how Parliament makes the law.
So leg legislative scrutiny, legislative quality,
and legit legitimacy of the law making process.
Um, it's fair to say the house's ability to deal with
and thoroughly scrutinized bills is being affected
by growing pressures on time, pressures on time
for members and for the house.
Um, and so focused on trying to present ideas
for discussion rather than solutions.
Although there are some ideas, um, in there about solutions.
Um, really the first step I think would be to achieve, uh,
an understanding across the committee and
therefore across parties, um, about
what good lawmaking would look like to assess
what we're currently doing against that.
And then if there are gaps to figure out, uh, how
to, how to plug those.
I think just in starting and say the submission doesn't seek
to criticize particular members or parties
or committees, um,
it really is looking at the system we've got now, um,
and raising some questions about whether there
are things we could do better.
Um, the question here is really whether the rules
and practice of the house in their current form, um,
promote good legislative and democratic outcomes.
And I don't think that's always the case.
So with that, by introduction, uh, by way of introduction,
I think when we are thinking about the legislative system,
um, obviously we think about the part that the House
of Representatives plays as, uh,
the main lawmaking body along
with the governor general forming Parliament.
Um, but there are, there is a wider system.
Uh, policy development is obviously done by the executive.
Um, implementation is done by the executive
and so is stewardship of, uh, of legislation.
Parliament also delegates its powers to make laws, uh,
to ministers and to other public authorities as well.
Of course, the judiciary interprets it, um,
and every part of the system is affected by the other parts.
What's really relevant to this submission is the part
that the house's rules and practices play in
how effective the law making by Parliament is.
Uh, just to set a bit more context,
as you know, we have no upper house.
The parliament is unicameral,
and so there is no second body to pause, revise,
or raise concerns about legislation.
It is entirely on the House of Representatives,
which makes it possible to make laws very quickly.
But also I think, um,
creates a particular emphasis on the role
that select committees play.
Um, 'cause that is the only place for revision.
The three year electoral cycle is also, um, short
by international standards.
Generally, parliament's, uh, terms are about 50% longer,
more like four and a half years on average around the world.
The short term places stress on, uh, the government
to develop its policy, um,
and on drafters to draft legislation.
Um, it affects the timeframes available to the house
to legislate as well.
And, um, so there is quite a time pressure, um,
which I think we see, you know, reflected in the speed
with which Laura is sometimes made. I don't want
Interrupt Flow. That's all right. But,
Um, something that I've observed is that, um,
most of those parliaments have a longer
term, do have an upper house.
Mm-hmm. So there is a natural, um, break to proceedings.
How many are you aware of that with a three year term?
Also have an upper house?
There's a very small number with a three year term.
I think we could find that out quite easily.
Um, I dunno off the off of my head,
but we're talking about a hand, literally a handful
of parliaments that have a three year
term. So yeah, Australia.
Yeah, no, my point was, uh, how many of those,
how many parliaments have three years in just
one uni camera house?
I'll come back to you. I dunno that answer. Thank you.
But un under the Westminster model, um,
emphasis on placed on having an opposition, um,
that can scrutinize, can critique the government.
Um, and the standing orders are, you know, to facilitate
and foster that debate and criticism.
The Parliament isn't supposed to be efficient in terms
of achieving things as quickly
as possible at the lowest possible cost.
It is supposed to be effective.
And really to be effective, it's gotta strike a balance
between the legitimate right of the government
to implement its policy program that was elected for.
Um, but also the role of non-government parties
and back bench, bench bench members,
generally in scrutinizing the lawmaking that has done.
I think another important part of the context is
that governments have a stable
and reliable majority in the house in New Zealand,
which means procedural decisions can be
reliably made by the government.
Decisions like taking urgency, uh, closure motions, um,
and extended sittings instructions
to silly committees are all things the government can
generally rely on doing.
So it's up to the house's own procedural settings
to achieve a balance, um, both in terms of
what the government wants to achieve,
but also what the house as a whole might
and making good law.
It appears to me that the current procedural settings are
placing some pressure on the legislative system,
and I, I think there's a good case for adjusting some
of those, and I'll set those out in a bit more detail.
Before I do just mention the role of the legislation design
and advisory committee, the LDAC, um,
which is an expert group.
It's appointed by the Attorney General
to promote quality legislation.
So while it was part of the executive, um, it is important
to the whole legislative system
because it gives advice on design
and framework, constitutional and public law issues.
And it, um, has, uh, some core objectives that it describes
as, as, you know, belonging to legislation three,
that it should be fit for purpose, uh,
that should be constitutionally sound,
and it should be accessible, able to be, you know, found
and understood and navigated.
So I think those objectives are good ones,
but they're expressed in terms of the product, the sort
of the result of the making of law.
I think the quality of the process is what matters as well,
because that gives, um, the balances those, uh,
rights of both government and opposition.
It gives public legitimacy, uh,
to law making if people can have confidence in the process.
That's followed. And, uh, there's a useful, um, piece
of writing on this that was, um, done in 2011
and fed into the standing orders review at the time.
Uh, it was written by Claudia Inger, Polly Higby
and Elizabeth McClean, it was called, what's the Hurry?
Um, and they actually articulated some quite useful
principles, um, I think about how lawmaking should be done.
So they suggested it should be an informed
and open policy deliberation.
Uh, there should be adequate scrutiny of bills.
Citizens should be able to participate.
Parliament should operate in a transparent manner.
Uh, they should try and produce high quality legislation.
Legislation shouldn't jeopardize fundamental
constitutional rights and principles.
Parliament should follow stable procedural rules.
They should foster and rather erode,
rather than erode respect for themselves as an institution.
The government has a right to govern so long
as it's got a majority in the house,
but also Parliament should be able
to enact legislation in an emergency very quickly.
Um, and so I, I think they're quite a good basis
for thinking about how our, you know,
lawmaking process is going.
Parliament's constantly passing rules,
but there's also an important role
for the public service in legislative stewardship, um,
identifying legislation that needs updating.
And there's an inherent tension, uh, for the house
and particularly for ministers.
And I think particularly for the leader
of the house in managing the need to kind
of move on those machinery
of government update type legislation with the need
to deliver on the government's policy program.
And that creates a real tension in finding time to do both
of those things in the house.
I would say though, that regardless of
that legislation is always going
to be better if it's been developed fully
before it's brought to the house.
That's gonna result in better law.
When policy hasn't been fully settled
before a bill's introduced, you're likely
to see substantive policy changes at select committee, um,
rather than refinement of the law.
Uh, and you also even less desirable are likely
to see a committee of the whole house.
So I think it would be worth thinking in this review about
whether there are incentives that could encourage, uh,
ministers, particularly because they're in charge
of almost all bills, um, to, to, to take that time
with the departments to develop policy fully in every case.
Maybe there are some incentives for doing that,
And there are pressures you all know on you as lawmakers
and on people that support you in this place.
And, and those are the things I wanna focus on in the next
couple of parts of the
submission and the written submission.
That's parts two and three.
Um, there's a huge workload demand
that arises from active engagement in legis, in legislating.
And I, I think if we're considering reforms, we need
to make sure that at, at the very least, we're not making
that more difficult, but ideally we are making it a bit
easier and lifting that
lightning, that workload a little bit.
So if it comes first to the house
and, um, committee of the whole house procedures start
by saying the time of the house is a limited resource,
and its allocation is a matter of constitutional importance
because it influences the capacity
and the quality of the state's lawmaking ability.
Um, at each review of standing orders,
we consider whether the settings in, in the rules
and practices of the house are right.
Um, and, and I think there's a really good opportunity to do
that in, in terms of how Parliament makes the law.
So normal sitting hours are 17 a week, uh,
for 28 weeks a year.
Uh, and I just apologize, uh, in the, um, on page 18
of the written submission, I've said 17.5 hours,
uh, that's a, a typo.
It's just 17 hours. No, we we're not missing half an hour.
Um, governments can access additional hours
through extended sittings and through urgency,
but frequent use of those,
I think does create another set of problems.
So in terms of urgency,
there's two main effects, as you know.
Uh, the first is that, you know, business can be progressed
through multiple stages in the same sitting day.
And also that the sitting continues until either all
of the urgent business is done, uh,
or the government decides it doesn't want
to make more progress.
Or in, you know, extreme cases,
we reach midnight on a Saturday
and the house has to adjourn.
There's no procedural threshold for urgency.
Um, the minister is required to give reasons for urgency
with some particularity, but there is no decision
to be made apart from a vote on
whether to have urgency or not.
As I said, governments always have a majority
they can rely on to do that.
And clearly there has to be a mechanism for laws to be able
to be passed quickly to deal with immediate situations
that are genuinely urgent.
That happens from time to time.
But on the other hand, it's not always apparent
why urgency is needed.
And, you know, ministers, uh,
across successive governments make no secret the fact
that often it is just used to progress the, uh,
the government's legislative program.
Um, and that might be an indicator that, uh,
the settings are not quite right.
There's not enough time to do that.
Urgency gives rise, I think, to a,
a few detrimental effects.
Um, bills have passed through multiple stages,
obviously are not subject, uh,
to the same pause in their consideration
where things are taken across multiple sitting days
so that they can be reviewed.
Revised members can do research and consultation.
Um, bills can be introduced without notice.
They can be a surprise to members who are not in government.
Opportunities to scrutinize the legislation are severely
curtailed other business, um, is
of course delayed while the urgent business has progressed.
And business dealt with under urgency usually takes longer
than business dealt with under normal hours.
By that I mean that the committee of the whole house stage,
for example, of a, of a bill under urgency is likely
to be longer than if
that bill was progressed in normal hours.
Um, select committee consideration, it is often omitted
for those bills as they go from first reading
to second reading and select committee meetings as well,
of course, are disrupted while the house is sitting.
Committees don't meet.
I think there's a, you know, those effects have
varying levels of severity.
I think the most significant one is the curtailing obsolete
committee consideration of bills.
And that's discussed a little bit later in this submission.
Um, back in 2011, I mentioned
that publication, what's The Hurry?
Um, that looked at, uh, urgency, um,
and identified these sorts of problems with it.
One of the results of that was
that standing orders committee in 2011, uh,
picked up on a proposal that, um, had existed for a couple
of years from the then leader
of the house who's now the chair of this committee, um,
to find a way for the government to extend its hours to not,
not under urgency, but to deal
with dis additional stages of bills.
Um, and so that's how extended sittings, uh, came to be.
There we go. Thank you.
I think, um,
that resulted in a dramatic reduction in the use of urgency
and the terms that immediately followed.
Yeah. Um, so between 2011
and, uh, 2020 is a graphic here on page 21 of the submission
that shows normal hours, 85.4% of time, uh, urgency, 9.2
of an extended settings 5.4%.
Um, so the house is actually spending more time in,
in regular hours than it had been prior
to the introduction of extended sittings.
What we see from the period 2020 to 25,
so the last two parliaments, uh,
is a reduction in the house sitting in normal hours down to
around 70% with a much greater use of urgency, more
so than in the pre extended sitting days.
And we see that in addition to the use of extended sittings.
So the house is spending more time doing things in extended
hours and less time doing things in normal hours.
Mm-hmm. The logical conclusion to me of that is
that the introduction of extended sittings hasn't been
sufficient to, to sort of curb the use of urgency,
which was its original intention.
And there are options for dealing that with that.
But I think the, the committee should consider, um,
I don't wanna develop those in detail now,
but I think that we we're thinking about whether there
should be some sort of procedural threshold for urgency.
Um, and, you know, examples would be things like a,
a greater majority needed in the house,
or a decision of the business committee,
or a decision by the speaker that,
that the business was genuinely urgent as is needed
for extraordinary urgency, um,
or measures to deal with some of the detrimental effects,
such as skipping the select committee stage.
Um, and, you know, there are, there are a range of,
of different options available,
but bearing in mind, as I said, that urgency has
to be available, um, there are urgent,
genuinely important matters that can't wait,
and the house needs to be able to respond to those.
I've mentioned that I think the omission
of the select committee stage is probably the most
detrimental effect of urgency.
Um, and, and that is
because select committees can, can bring, uh, expertise
and time and input to bear on legislation
that simply can't be done in a two hour debate in the house
or in committee of file house.
Um, in, in the last two parliaments, 20%
of government bills have been passed under urgency without
being considered by a select committee.
And as I say, there are some compelling reasons why
that should happen sometimes,
but, so the procedural option needs to be retained,
but the presumption could be reversed so
that it's not automatic that if a bill is set down
for agency for first and second reading,
that it won't go to a select committee.
And in fact, the member in charge
of the bill would need to move that that happens.
Um, that would at least give responsibility
to the member in charge of the bill for saying, I am, I,
I think we should omit the select committee stage.
Perhaps they'd have to give reasons why.
Um, perhaps that motion would be debatable,
which would then impose a, I suppose, a penalty of time, um,
on the use of urgency
where it was gonna skip select committees.
Um, I think, you know, those are some procedural solutions.
They're not the only ones I think
they're worth thinking about.
I mean, a more extreme example would be that laws passed
through all stages under urgency.
Um, could only be temporary law.
They only lasted, enforced for a couple of years.
Um, and then they'd either need to be confirmed
through the normal process, uh, or extended in some way,
or, uh, they'd be repealed.
Um, I mentioned extended sittings as well.
I think that's a, a necessary mechanism.
The house doesn't have enough normal hours
and, uh, you know, they've, they've been used to effect
to, to create more time.
Um, one of the difficulties of them is the disruption
of select committees, because the time
for extended sittings is the same time committees
traditionally meet Wednesday
and Thursday mornings in 2011, when
that procedure was established in the way I described
before, um,
the bar on select committees meeting at the same time was a
deliberate safeguard because it was thought
that it wouldn't be overused
because it would then slow down the committee process.
And, and that and effect would, you know,
slow down the process of legislation
through committees as it's transpired.
That doesn't seem to be much of a deterrent.
Um, it's, it's still being used, uh,
to a significant degree in combination with urgency.
Um, and, uh, on page 24, there's a, just a,
a graphic showing, um, house sittings
during select committee meeting
times how they've come about.
So you can see in the, uh, in the early PAs, the 50th
and the 51st, immediately following the introduction
of extended sittings, mostly extended sittings haven't on
government mo uh, on, um,
agreement of the business committee.
They were a determination, uh,
because they were generally non-controversial bills.
Often they were treaty wat settlement bills,
and there was agreement a about it.
Um, as times got on, increasingly, um,
government motion has been the way
that extended settings have happened,
and you can see that from the 52nd Parliament onwards.
That's the predominant way.
Uh, and the, the figures in black, there are urgency.
So they show the number of times while committees should
have been meeting that either urgency
or extended settings were preventing that from happening.
Um, the result of that is, you know,
pressure on select committees on their workload.
Uh, they either meet piecemeal, uh, before 9:00 AM
and then lunch breaks or don't meet at all.
I think there are some options to deal with that.
And as I said a couple of times, I don't want to, you know,
set those all out in detail.
Now, that's something for the committee to work on.
Um, one option would be to allow committees to meet, uh,
while the house is sitting during extended sittings.
Um, really the, the difficulty with
that is members would need to be in two places at once,
and it probably removes the disincentive
for the overuse of extended sittings.
Uh, another option might be that extended sit sittings
that are extended by a government motion could only be
extending a Thursday into a Thursday evening
and a Friday morning, for example.
And only the business committee could do extended sittings,
uh, into Wednesday and Thursday mornings, um,
because that's likely to lead to a high level of consensus,
um, among using them.
And, and would get back to
how the previous settings have been prior
to the 53rd Parliament
To start, can I make a comment on that?
Mm-hmm. So the originally that was brought in
because there was a lot of pressure
to get treaty settlement bills done.
Uh, there was also practical consideration that those
who were coming for, so the committee
to settlement bills more, more
or less, would've to spend an extra night in Wellington, uh,
'cause of the, um, uh, the, the lateness of that bill,
those bills passing if there were later in the day.
Uh, and so there was pa there was a suggestion that there,
there would be a second chamber proposal,
which was very clumsy.
Um, and I didn't like,
and so this was the sort of compromise that was agreed
that the, the, the key to it was that extended settings was,
it was intended that where there's legislation
that had majority house support, uh,
the business committee could agree that it would take place,
uh, and select committees would, um, uh, would sit.
And that it's just unfortunately sort of fallen into that,
uh, category of, uh, uh, we, we've got a lot of work to do.
Let's just get it through, um, not worry about things.
So some, some sort reclassification of that wouldn't be, uh,
altogether outta the way. Yeah.
Oh, well then speaking of a second chamber,
there might be something that not in favor of
as we move on a bit through the submission.
Oh, okay. It's not the same proposal.
Um, I think, uh,
it's also worth considering whether the strain on the
legislature could be, um, relieved a bit
by reducing the number of bills that need to be introduced.
And I don't mean by that, uh, less legislation, I just mean
that it might be able
to be covered in a few more broad bills.
Um, at the moment, um, the standing orders contain rules,
um, that give effect to the principle that, uh, a,
a law should, uh, sorry,
a different matter should be dealt with in different laws.
So standing orders 2 6 4 2 6 6 2 6 7, um, require bills
to deal with a single subject area
or to meet, to be a specified cri uh,
specified category of omnibus bills.
And, and I, I'm not suggesting abandoning that, I think
that's a, a, a good safeguard.
Um, it certainly prevents there being miscellaneous bills a
about, you know, wide range of unrelated subjects,
which makes the law more accessible and reduces surprise.
But in situations where there could be,
it could be a good incentive
for good pre introductory processes
where there's been policy consultation
and white papers, green papers,
maybe there's been a law commission inquiry
or a select committee inquiry into the policy area early,
it's possible that a, a, a bill
of broader scope could be allowed.
Um, and as, as I, I guess, as a reward for doing that, um,
because sort of rewards offered at the moment for, um,
good pre introductory processes haven't been taken up.
They're obviously not, uh, you know, sufficient, uh,
incentive to do that.
But I, I do think it's worth thinking about whether
the rules around single subject areas could be relaxed a
little bit in on a case by case basis as an incentive.
Um, one of the thing I think is quite closely related
to extended sittings and, um, urgency is the use
of instructions to select committees.
Um, so the procedure for instructions
to select committees is an old one.
Uh, in 1979, the norm of all of, of all builds,
generally going to committees was established.
Um, the procedure for instructions is older than that.
And until 2011, uh, instructions
to committees always moved without debate.
Um, the standing orders committee at the time was concerned
about that, that it could see the fore shortening
of select committee consideration of bills routinely, uh,
because there was no time penalty
for the government to pay for doing that.
And so, um, it was going to recommend
that all instructions be debatable, all instructions
to select committees be debatable.
There wasn't universal agreement about that.
And so the compromise was that if the only instruction is
to shorten the reporting date between four
and six months, it not be debatable.
Um, the standing orders committee
also said there's no intention.
The default period for select committee consideration should
be shortened, and the government should exercise due
constraint when considering the tation
of the select committee process.
So, you know, while the six month period
of consideration is the default, only a minority
of bills over the last couple of parliament, um,
have actually benefited from that.
Uh, and I do genuinely mean a minority.
44% were referred to committees
for the default six month period.
Um, and there's a breakdown
of statistics on page 28 of the submission.
Um, so 44% went for six months, 22% went for between four
and six months, 13% went for four months or less,
and 20%, as I mentioned previously, didn't go at all
because they asked, uh, through under urgency.
The select committee system in New Zealand is widely
acknowledged as being a, a, you know,
a successful and effective one.
Um, select committees are often called the workhorse
of parliament because of the volume of quality work they do.
Uh, and because of the, you know, direct engagement
with the public, the current procedure doesn't achi appear
to be achieving, uh, that purpose where only now minority
of bills are going to a committee
for, for that period of time.
So one potential change would be that all instructions
to select committees, again, be debatable, uh,
to put a constraint on shortening select committee, consider
consideration of bills in all, but the most important cases.
Um, I've discussed
how bills can undergo substantial policy change during
consideration by select committee
or in committee of the whole house
where the policy hasn't been fully fleshed out Before
introduction, there's been a growing practice
of proposing substantive policy changes at committee
of the whole, whole house stage that's been recognized
as a problem for quite a long time.
It's, it's not new.
Uh, as far back as 1995,
the standing orders committee was urging that amendments
that made substantive change should go
to select committees for consideration.
In 2011, the Standing Orders Committee said,
major policy changes can be made to build a little warning
and without sufficient scrutiny.
Uh, in 2017, the committee reiterated it was good practice
for substantive amendments to go to select committees,
and in 2020, um, the house changed the standing orders to,
to make that easier to occur.
Um, I think the substantive alteration of the policy
of a bill at the committee stage
was very late in the process.
Um, remains an issue
that warrants some consideration by this committee.
Um, and I, I don't propose, um, setting,
uh, a specific procedural consequence for it,
but one possibility would be that the committee articulates
that we're a, uh, we, a,
an amendment paper contains substantive amendments, um,
and it's introduced at committee of the whole house.
That is a fact to the chairperson
and committee of the whole house would take into account
when considering whether to accept a closure or not.
Related to that, um, is the late release of amendment papers
or what used to be called supplementary order papers, um,
the majority of them are being released,
and they have been over the last couple
of parliaments one day or less
before the committee
of the whole house, to which they relate.
So in the 53rd and 54th parliaments
and see some figures on page 31 of the submission, 153
amendment papers of supplementary order papers
were lodged by ministers.
57% were released, uh, one day or less
before the committee began, 11 outta the 17
that were so substantive.
They required a regulatory impact statement,
were released one day or less before the committee began,
and 38 of them that were 10 pages or longer,
or in some cases a full revision tracked bill
and were released one day or or less, uh, excuse me,
before the committee began.
It's problematic because it is, uh, difficult for members
to prepare for committee for whole house
where they're asked substantive amendments,
not only in terms of preparing debate,
but also preparing their own amendments if they dunno
what the minister's amendments are going to be.
So it would be possible to put some sort
of minimum notice period, um, on, on the lodging
of amendment papers that was considered in 2017, uh,
by the standing Orders Committee suggested to trial,
but it wasn't ever actually trialed.
I, I think rather than providing a firm deadline,
an option would be for the chairperson again,
to consider whether, when,
whether you know they're gonna accept a closure or not.
Um, when their amendments were released,
were they released in good time
or have they just been released
before the committee of the whole house starts?
And that could provide an incentive, uh,
to, to release them earlier.
Mm-hmm. The final part of my submission, um,
looks at the select committee structure and membership,
because that is all part of the picture
of the pressures on the legislative system.
And I'm just say, to start with,
this year marks the 40th anniversary
of subject select committees as we know them today,
they were introduced in 1985,
and I think it's a model that served us really well.
Um, it's not a universal one throughout Westminster derived
parliaments, but a really big advantage
of multifunctional select committees that deal
with all business in a subject area is the expertise
that members can develop in that particular subject area.
Occasionally the subject areas are reorganized.
The last significant time was 2017.
The number of committees were reduced from 13 to 12.
Um, and there was a second part of that reform
that was proposed but didn't eventuate,
which was a suggestion that the number
of members on each select committee should
reduce, uh, to seven.
Um, one of the other, uh, I think,
important achievements there have been is the establishing
of a specialist committee to deal with petitions.
The petitions committee has led to
much greater attention being given to petitions,
and I think a greater level of satisfaction
amongst petitioners that they're, you know,
that the issues they've brought
to Parliament are getting attention.
Um, I think the fundamen,
the Select committee system is fundamentally sound one, um,
but there are some adjustments that are needed,
so select committees can properly carry out their role.
So I think it's worth revisiting the size of committees.
I think the number of committees is probably fine, number
of subject committees, but, um,
and I think it is worth considering the
number of members on each one.
So currently there's 103 seats on the 12 subject committees.
So the average membership is 8.6.
Um, as I said, the 2017 review, uh, recommended an average
of seven members, so there'd be 84 seats on subject
committees, which is a reduction of 19.
Um, I think the advantages of that, it would mean
that most members would only be on one committee,
and that's probably an advantage.
It would mostly be enjoyed by back bench government members
who are a, a smaller cohort, um,
because of the number of members of the executive
who don't serve on committees.
Um, that in turn would, you know, enhance the ability
to keep on top of papers, to be able to devote more time,
uh, to hearings, to nip not have to be in two places at once
or rush from one meeting to another.
Uh, the 2020 review also suggested the same thing,
but it didn't eventuate when the tech came time
for the business committee to establish committees
and populate them, recognizing the negotiation that happened
between parties beforehand.
Committees returned to being pretty much the same size.
And I think one of the concerns could be that that's going
to leave back bench members with nothing
to do if they're not on a committee.
I don't think that's gonna be the case,
because there are two specialist committees that meet on,
on the same sort of frequency as subject committees,
regulations, review,
and petitions, both small committees, um, you know,
meet every week as well.
And, and there is work to be done, uh, on those.
I'm also gonna suggest the creation
of another specialist committee,
a legislative scrutiny committee, um,
which I'll, I'll come to in a moment.
The number of submissions
that committees have received has increased enormously,
and that is no doubt a, you know,
a big influence on, uh, on workload.
There's a, a graph on page 36, um, at the top,
they're showing, uh, the number of submissions,
and you can see that it's kind of doubled
or more over the last few parliaments.
I can update that a little bit based, uh,
from when these figures were done in, um, 15 September.
So since 1996, uh, to now.
So since the start of MNP,
there have been about 1.3 million
submissions made to committees.
And this parliament, more than 600,000
of those submissions have been made this parliament's,
you know, as you know, two years old.
So nearly half of all submissions have been
received in this parliament.
And it isn't just a function
of having some controversial bills
before the house, that always does drive up the number
of submissions, but you can see from the second graph there,
uh, the upper quartile of, you know, submissions that have,
uh, had 415 submissions or more, which is a, is a lot.
So yeah, I think there's an increasing appetite
amongst the public to engage
with Parliament to submit to it.
It's a very good thing.
And, you know, we do work to promote public engagement, um,
and it's a good thing up to the point
that it really affects committee's ability to do their job.
One of the things I'm gonna suggest is
that we look at other mechanisms for engagement,
where people who may want to say that they oppose a bill
or support it, have a channel where they could do
that without necessarily having to make a formal submission.
It might see a reduction in number of form submissions,
or just very short, short, you know, short ones
that say, don't pass this bill.
If they were able to simply indicate
that they supported a bill or didn't,
and we were able to provide that data to committees,
um, that could be useful.
Neither of these things are scientific.
Neither the number of submissions
or the number of people who support the bill.
It's not an opinion poll,
but it might give people a way to be heard, uh,
without having to go down that formal channel.
So I think that's worth considering.
The last thing I'll talk about is a, is a, uh,
legislative scrutiny committee.
Um, I've proposed this before in, in 2020.
Um, I'd like to have another go.
Um, and I think there's a, there's a role
for committee in promoting good lawmaking.
Um, the regulations Review Committee promotes, you know,
a good secondary legislation.
Um, primary legislation I think needs a bit more of a focus.
So there are some, I, I've got some ideas about things
that could do and how it could work, um, as a,
as a basis for a discussion.
So the committee could administer rules, uh, related
to bills introduced
after a good pre introductory process by, you know,
by which I mean the public consultation,
maybe law commission review, that sort of thing.
So it could decide how, what the incentives are
for those bills to proceed in the house.
Could be that they have a wider scope.
It could be that, uh, debate on them is, uh, is reduced,
something like that, examining bills that are
before other committees and reporting to them on
issues of legislative scrutiny.
That's something that all committees
are asked to do at the moment.
But similar to the function
that the Regulations Review Committee performs in relation
to regulation making powers, it reports
to other committees on those, it could consider
and report to the house on non-controversial bills,
rather than being referred to subject committees.
Um, it could be things like, you know, regulatory systems,
bills, um, confirmation bills, um,
uh, revision bills.
Uh, and, and other non-controversial public policy
legislation could go to a legislative scrutiny committee,
um, that would free up some time
for subject select committees.
Uh, it could report to the House of Matters
of legislative quality that arise out
of amendments proposed in select committee
and an amendment papers proposed
at committee of the whole house.
Um, and, and this is the part
that I think is a little bit like
having a, a second chamber.
Um, it could conduct examinations
of non-controversial legislation involving questioning
ministers and officials in lieu of a committee
of the whole house stage for those bills.
So this would be similar to the main committees
that operate in the United Kingdom, um,
or the Federation Chamber that operates in Australia.
The drawbacks of having a ongoing second chamber
as there are not enough members, and,
and it's difficult to be in both places,
but if you had a committee that was devoted
to legislative scrutiny, it could carry out that function
and free up some committee of the whole house, time
for the main house to, you know, to proceed
with other business that could be live streamed,
um, televised.
So that it, it, you know, people could see
what was happening as they can
with committee of the whole house. And, and it
Would presumably sit at the same time as the
House. Yes.
Um,
but potentially involve a smaller number of members.
Um, could have fluid membership, it,
it could have members summing onto it when there was a,
you know, bill of particular interest to them.
Um, it could also engage
with the parliamentary council office about matters
of legislative stewardship.
Um, and it could consider a report to the house on,
on matters related legislative scrutiny.
So there's a parallel there
with the work the Regulations Review Committee does
on secondary legislation.
I think the other thing, a feature of it could be
that it's not subject to government control.
So you could achieve that in various ways.
You could make the deputy speaker ex officio the chair of it
as, as one of the presiding officers is the chair
of the petitions committee at the moment.
Um, and, you know, you could have all parties being entitled
to membership, but not having a majority, uh,
of the government, which would ensure
that we had a small group, uh,
of members rather than the whole committee
of the whole house looking at legislation.
It could really focus on those legislative quality issues.
So I think that's worth considering both in its own right,
but because of the time it could save in the house
and for select committees on non-controversial matters.
And, um, although the public perception is
that everything passed on the house is controversial,
and there's always debate
and, you know, a clash about it, that isn't the case.
Um, it was a substantive amount of legislation
where there's, if not universal agreement,
at least reasonably wide agreement.
I think that's worth considering as well.
Just in conclusion, I'd say the way
that Parliament makes laws is fundamentally important
to society, um, because it has impact on the lives
and prosperity of everyone in the country.
The law needs to be high quality.
It needs to be fit for purpose,
constitutionally sound and accessible.
And lawmaking, I think needs to maintain a sense
of legitimacy so that the public have trust
and confidence in it as well.
Um, I'm just concerned that that isn't always the case,
and I invite you as a committee to think about
what good lawmaking looks like, uh, the extent
to which the overall legislative system
and the house part of in particular,
is contributing to these objectives.
And if you can see gaps, then you know
how we could go about addressing those
through adjusting the rules and practices of the house.
Thank you for your time, and if anyone's got
any questions, I'll be happy to take.
I think we've got a lot of questions.
Um, so, uh, if I might start the, the, where you kind
of finish is the legislative, what did you call them?
Committee. Committee.
Uh, I think that is something we should, um,
give some consideration to.
Um, one
of my early notes was from something you said earlier was
that, you know, we have things like, um, well,
they're called statutes reviews Yeah.
Or statute provisions. Um, yes.
Whole lot of those sort of, uh, perfunctory bills, you,
you just do because they get updated.
Mm-hmm. Um, uh, my thoughts about that was, well,
could they be done in a more of a select committee style,
but your final proposal, which I must I hadn't read up to
that point, um, uh, would be something I think we should,
uh, think of it further on.
Yeah, it's, it would almost be a hybrid committee
of the whole house select committee kind of thing,
because it would be small, like a committee,
but it would be doing the
function of the committee of the whole house.
But it might have a membership of 15 or 16. It it
Could, I mean, it could, or you know,
members might come on
and off it, depending on the business in front of it. Yes.
Yeah. So you, so parties in the house would've
seats allocated on that.
Yeah. You could do it that Way, that body. Yeah.
I think, I think that's, uh, with teasing out
what other people's views are, but I'll go to Ricardo.
Thank you very much for some quick fire ones,
hopefully to not take too much time.
So, um, on the closure motions, which you've, um, uh,
made some suggestions in relationship to late amendments,
do you have any proposed changes as well in terms of
how closure motions are carried out when there is urgency
as a way to also, I guess, yeah.
Um, mitigate, uh, the excessive use of urgency as well
as the reality that government parties ultimately also have
a level of control as to whether a closure motion actually
ends up passing or otherwise?
Yeah, and I think I, I,
I think the same control might be the answer there
that this committee could articulate that, you know, one
of the things that the chair takes into account when
considering accepting a closure is that, you know,
has this bill been through the normal legislative process
when were the amendments to it, uh, dealt with?
Um, and, uh, you know, if it's under urgency, the answers
to those questions will be, it will happen very quickly.
And so that's a factor to take into account when considering
whether to accept closure or not.
And just briefly on, I think
That's all, sorry. I think that's
actually happening to an extent anyway.
'cause committee stages under urgency take longer the
committee stages outside agency and just
On urgency. Um,
would you be supportive,
I guess an additional safeguard, um, to, in relationship
to your comments that urgency
should be used for urgent matters?
Adding something like, um, a minister being required
to issue a statement, potentially even debatable
to justify the use of urgency, um, as a way to, I guess,
give the public a level of, um, transparency
and information as to why urgency is being used.
And they do have to give reasons now
and they have to give them with some particularity,
so they need to be quite detailed.
Um, once they've done that, that that is the only kind
of hurdle we need to pass single emergency, so long
as you've got the numbers in the house.
But I think it is one of the solutions the committee could
think about, whether that's debatable
and, you know, then it would kind
of create a time penalty means maybe urgency wouldn't be
used so much, whether the speaker should have
to be convinced that urgency is actually warranted.
I, I think some of those controls are worth
thinking about. Thank
You. Just, um,
um, going back to your, um, sort of tied up to
what you're saying, um, Ricardo is where,
where you are saying that if, uh, you, um,
bill hasn't had long scrutiny, so it might've been in
that category that was the four months and two days.
Mm-hmm. Um, w would a compromise be that the
standard default came down to five months?
Uh, what I'd be interested in is if you've got any stats on
how many bills so far, this parliament, for example,
have been, uh, four days in two months, uh, uh,
four months in two days,
and then have been subject to a request
to business committee for an extension. Um,
Can certainly get those states,
Well, in many cases those extensions are three
to four weeks, which takes you to five weeks.
Mm-hmm. And I think maybe five months, sorry, which maybe,
um, that might be a,
a way in which discouraging that shorter period.
Mm. Um, and the second thing that around that was, um,
you mentioned, um, perhaps a,
a a debate over the admission of, um, amendment papers
or as opposed to a, a, a strict time for before,
before which they should be delivered.
So you're saying at the moment the problem is they drop
them, uh, a governance of, of both sides
and dropped them the day before?
Yeah. Or on the day or, or on the day. Right.
Maybe if there was a, um, if there was, um,
what my rationale there,
I've just lost in my head why my rationale was,
but I, there'd be no way that, uh,
those amendments are hooked up, uh, just overnight, uh,
or on the day.
So the, the thought throughs are considered.
So I think having 72 hours is the, the, um, uh,
as a time that if you, if a minister wants
to make amendments, uh,
table 'em in the house 72 hours ahead mm-hmm.
The que the question then becomes,
what if it's the villas picked up under urgency
and how does that fit in?
So there's Yeah. No sort of
Consideration. And, and that's why
having the, you know,
the chair considering, well, this debate's gonna go longer
because they've just been,
the amendments have just been dropped, is more flexible.
That works under urgency as well. It
It is, but it puts a lot on the chair. It
It does, but, you know. Yeah.
And, uh, consequently could put pressure on,
on rosters and everything else.
You can't Yeah. You can't deny in a political environment
politics, oh, no. Play a part.
No, I, I think that's Right. The rules, uh,
much easier, uh, on everybody concerned. There
Will be the old amendment where,
and parliamentary council would know better than I do,
but where, you know, there is actually a,
an important last minute change.
Um, so I think there needs to be ability to deal with those
where the, perhaps a drafting error
has been spot at the last minute.
There needs to be a way of dealing with those still,
but we're at a substantive policy change, or,
and, and it's last minute.
I think there needs to be a mechanism.
Good. Then I've got some more,
A couple of quick questions from me.
One, thank you for acknowledging the struggles
of a back bench mp.
I'm on some five committees, but, um,
but no, seriously, two things I want to ask,
actually back onto this urgency.
Are there any of the Westminster style parliaments that use,
uh, like some principles for urgency that, um, that,
that a particular matter has to be
measured against? Is that something you,
Not that I know of, but we could
find out if that is the case.
I, I think it is a, you know, it is, it is an artifact
of Westminster derived parliaments that the,
and many of them still the government has abso absolute
control of the agenda.
So I could find out if there are any, but I don't know of
Any. Okay. And then my
quick other question was, and thanks.
I think some of your ideas
around select pennies are interesting.
Um, did you give any thought, obviously, you know, um,
we've been keen obviously on having more opposition
chaired select committees and act.
Did you give any thought? 'cause obviously traditionally
some of the select committees are kind of by Yeah.
Just tradition are chaired by the opposition.
Do you have any thought to nominating more
of the subject matter select committees
that actually should be chaired by,
um, an opposition member?
Yeah, I mean, I think that that is an idea
that's come up at, at numerous reviews
and I think is worth considering.
Again, um, it's been tried, uh,
by governments in the past without there being
any change in standing orders.
Yes. And we're sort of reverted back to type,
but I think, you know, I think that is worth consideration.
Having said that, again, uh, human nature, um,
up against politics, um, I wouldn't like to see
that prescribed, uh, any more than I'd like to see, uh,
greater prescription around the use of urgency.
Uh, governments of all stripes use urgency
and the principle that was stated right at the start,
government's got a right to cover.
So they need to have some freedom to be able
to pull the house together, to put life to the,
to, uh, policy. Uh,
Yeah. Thank you. And
just continue on select committees.
Um, obviously your graph on page 38 is quite telling in
terms of the number of submissions, written submissions, um,
and the capacity that your team has, um, fully understand
that, I guess looking at how we,
'cause I'm, I think the right for people
to engage is really important.
I don't know if you can find the information,
but have you done any work on the amount
of oral submission time today compared to the past?
Not, I'm not talking about in a clump,
but the whole thing now has become of a number
of parliaments, you know, five minutes for individual,
10 minutes for, I mean that's, it's just, it's not a rule,
it's just what we generally agree to, which, you know,
looking at previous parliaments over the
years, that was quite different.
Yeah. And to actually prosecute some
of those key issues to have some experts.
And on occasion we do agree to have an expert speak
for longer like yourself.
But, um, you know, how, um, is there any sort
of work to be done in that space?
Or is it just the nature of the, our our modern democracy
and the connection through the internet
and form submissions
that we are just sort of stuck with what we have?
'cause sometimes it is really frustrating as a,
you actually want to delve deep into the
issues and actually get it right.
But, you know, ding ding, your five minutes is up. Yeah.
I mean, I think that there are a few factors at play there
that the sheer number of submissions,
the fact there is no more time in the day
and for committees to meet, you know, they're still limited
by the number of working hours and days that there are.
Um, but the vast, vast increase in submissions.
But I think there are other potential solutions.
And I know some other submitters have raised different
ways of consulting the public.
I've mentioned one, you know, potentially
possibly polling people Yeah.
Or that sort of thing. But, uh, others have talked about,
you know, things like citizens assemblies
or town hall style meetings where maybe, you know,
you hear from a range of people
and where, where committees have done those, um,
once people have heard others saying what they were going
to say, often they, you know,
they know their ideas being heard.
So we're not stuck
with committees only doing a hearing as we're doing right now.
That is common and it's a good way of doing things.
But it is hard when there are vast numbers of submissions.
The adaptation of using subcommittees to hear, you know,
submissions simultaneously, I think is a, is a good one
and one that will continue.
Um, and I, I wouldn't want to see public engagement decline,
but I do think we need to think about other ways of, um,
having people engage with committees
where you can still get useful information from 'em.
Um, but uh, you know, we can manage the,
the timeframes because
Also hard as a, that's also hard as a committee sometimes
'cause you wanna respect the, the petitioner.
Yeah. But then you've asked every million question you
possibly can, and you already know all the
answers. Oh yeah. Sorry.
I know exactly what, yeah, so exactly what, so do you,
does your office use AI yet?
Uh, no. Not for, yeah. I can see that
Coming where, where there might be from a body
of submissions, uh, just, you know, one
or two recommendations that need to be considered.
Mm. And then a consideration of
who would be best present those.
Yeah. Um, given that
before 1985, so 40 years ago that
that facility didn't exist.
Mm. Um, parliament just spent a lot more time
in the chamber, uh, predominantly voting, talking
to yourself and talking to yourself.
Yeah. Uh, which most of us like doing, sorry.
Yeah. And I think there is a role for it,
and I know that departmental officials have,
have used it a few times to analyze submissions
because of the volumes they've got.
The, the uses I see for are in identifying, um, you know,
particular submissions, committees we want to hear from,
but also in helping us vet all the submissions
because we go through them all and
look for unparliamentary language.
Things are been potentially defamatory.
While I would still want to human decision maker to do that,
AI could fairly quickly probably flag up ones that,
um, need human attention.
So I think that, you know, there's something we'd like
to trial, uh, we're not using at
The moment, make a point that if, if this committee,
if this was the committee meeting, uh, two parliaments ago,
uh, ready for the next two parliaments, um,
we would never have been able to anticipate, uh, the,
the access that people have to now just steam stuff No.
Uh, in the, in the ways we have.
So we've gotta make sure we're
uphold the tools that can help.
Yeah. Well, two parliaments ago there were
95,000 emissions, which we thought was a lot.
Now there's over 600,000 in this one.
Yeah. Anyone else? Uh, Lawrence. Right.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair. Um, Mr.
Speaker, now I have two questions.
The first one is pick up on select committees.
Now we're also seeing, and you talk about polling.
Now, we know that polling is not the beyond end all,
but now we've seen roughly, let's say about 14 bills
that I know of where the public opposition
to the bills is greater than 75%.
Yeah. What is do you think is the role
of the select committee when you get that level, you know,
up towards 98, 90 9% of opposition from the public,
but then the select committee is, you know, recommending it
to be passed because of government pressure.
What do you think then is the role of the Select committee
as a legislature to actually represent the public in that?
Yeah. Well, I, I think there's
a couple of factors at play there.
And one is, you know, the governments, uh, I,
I guess it's right to pass through its legislative program
because it has the majority of the house to do that.
Um, and, uh, for the committee to consider the issues
and try and improve the bill, um, it seems
to have been an increasing feature for committees
to get advice on the number of, for
and against bills, uh, and to report on that.
And I think, you know, reporting on it is valid
because it is often an argument
that those opposed to bills will use.
I think it's probably also fair to say
that people are more likely to submit on something to say,
I don't like it, than they are to say, this is great.
You should pass it. Um,
and so that's why I think, you know, any kind of gauging
of public opinion we do is never going to be, well, I mean,
we, it could be scientific,
but that's probably more difficult.
But just giving people a, a, a effectively an outlet
where they can say what they think about it.
I, I don't see that there's a problem
with committees recommending bills being passed, um,
even when the majority of submissions are against it.
That is the nature of politics.
Um, and I, and I, you know, I don't think we can, uh, change
that or that we should try to,
but it, it, to me it is, it should, you know, should be part
of the committee's reporting, but it might be
able to be almost two streams.
You could say, well, look, a hundred thousand people
said they didn't like this bill.
5,000 said they do like it
and we heard these expert submissions on the issue
and this is what they said.
And all of those things are part of the picture.
And the second Question on that, just, um, well, not,
not on this one, but just separately, um, in,
you have a number of recommendations now in terms of
is there a way for you to engage with like
what do you think is the priority
or the, in terms of what you have recommended?
Yeah. Here, because what we're trying to see, see based on
what you're submitting is addressing some
of the balance issues between the
legislature and the executive.
So do you have a sense of
what do you think is the most
urgent that needs to be addressed?
Um, it is, it's difficult just
because of the interrelated nature of them all,
which is the thing I sort of started talking about.
I do think, um, addressing the use of urgency, um,
is important both for what happens in the house
and, you know, um, confidence in the lawmaking that happens,
but also it's flow on effect to committees of
both using up their time so they can't meet,
but also preventing bills going to committees.
Um, I think that is probably the,
it's difficult to pick just one thing.
As I say, they're interrelated, but I think
that to me is very important. Uh, cool.
Yeah. Just, so just back on select committees, um, yeah,
I mean, I think your suggestion is one
that we actually have, uh,
discussed on a couple of select committees.
I've been in the way of just having a wave
so people can have an outlet without,
'cause again, we're getting a lot of
submissions that are just one or two lines.
Yeah. But another thing could be to be clear about
what is the purpose of Yes.
Um, so people kind of realize that.
And also maybe again, ing your comments, um, having, giving,
maybe having some more standards
around when select committees can actually return
submissions too, if they're not really providing
any substantive value.
I don't know keen, keen to get your comments.
'cause I know other jurisdictions do do things like
that if the submission actually doesn't
provide anything of substance. And it's,
A lot of the jurisdictions will often compare ourselves
with, don't routinely refer bills to committees.
And so submissions are relatively rare
and they're never in these sorts of numbers.
Um, you know, it might be 20, 30, 50 or a couple of hundred.
So it's manageable. It's hard to find a,
a comparator really, of a, you know, of a country
of a similar sort of size and system.
Um, but I, that is something that, um,
the previous standing orders committee,
I think it was the last one, might've been the one
before, said that committees might actually have
to get a bit more picky about,
or choosy maybe about which submissions
they hear from Thoughtful.
Um, you, you can do that.
There is, there's actually no right in standing orders
for everyone to be heard, which is good
because it's impossible now to do that.
And, um, you know, she is sometimes have
articulated that quite well.
I think in the principles, the treaty ang bill there,
which is the biggest one we've had so far, um,
that the chair did articulate some of those things
and try to manage expectations.
I think that's going to, you know, continue to be an issue.
Um, thanks. You talked earlier about, um,
the time in the house being a scarce resource,
and I was interested in your ideas further about, uh,
having bills that cover multiple policy issues as well as,
um, that sort of reviewing and housekeeping Yeah.
Uh, for want of a better of a word.
And, and I think that is something
that would be really important.
'cause one of the challenges, um,
we've seen in this parliament is, you know,
three different versions of, you know, a piece
of legislation touching the education
amendment bill, for example.
Uh, and if you could do it in one process mm-hmm.
You're saving the select committee time,
you're saving the house time.
Um, and if the scope of what was covered was broad enough,
you'd also deal with your housekeeping
issue. That's becoming a problem.
Yeah. And it has increased a little bit over time.
Um, the, the idea of what is a consequential amendment, um,
or consequential in a bill has expanded a bit.
It used to be just things
that were actually needed in order to make the law work.
It's been expanded to things that, to make the policy work.
So that is broader. It could potentially go a bit wider.
I think there is another factor as well, which is, um,
and education's quite a good example.
You know, a a lot of the law
around education is in one statute, it's just
that policy development often is on different tracks
and is a bit piecemeal.
Um, so an amendment of the education statute that covers
all the things in it is, is possible now.
Um, that's the other side of it,
but I, I do think, you know, there is,
there is some value in thinking about
whether that could be a bit broader.
And, you know, it's something we discussed at, with,
with the leader of the house from time to time.
We've got this bill that can deal with most of these things,
but there's still the need to have a couple of others
to deal with sort of a related issue,
but it's not close enough
to come into the same bill. I think there's some value in that.
But you are proposing that the scope
of it could be broadened.
It, it could be particularly as an incentive for, um,
where there's, you know, there's been good policy
development, there's been pre introductory
consultation and that sort of thing. Yeah.
Um, in your submission, it's,
the house sits 17 hours a week for 28 weeks.
Mm-hmm. Um, I looked at,
I think it said 90 95 was 19 and a half hours a week.
Um, like is that, do we need to consider the hours of,
of the house and the weeks it meets as, as scared as I am
to ask that question, I think it's Or shortened it. Yeah.
No, I think it is, it is worth thinking about
that the time the house has set for has decreased over time.
Um, Fridays used to be used, um,
sometimes mornings were used as well.
That's just come down over time.
Maybe it's come down too far.
I get the, I guess the other factor is though,
that now almost all of our debates are time limited,
which they didn't use to be agreed.
Um, so, you know,
there is a trade off there apart from committee
of the whole house and unusual debates
that don't have a time limit, but generally there one
or two hours, which is, is pretty tight by kind
of international standards.
So, so that 1995, um,
boat were all personal boats. Well, true. Yeah.
So you use up a lot of time. Just
Hours and hours.
Uh, um, um, David, Dr. Wilson, we might, uh,
leave your submission there
and check it up again at our next one
'cause people can have a think about some of these things.
Yeah. Thanks Mr. Spear.
And we'll move to hearing, uh, other submissions.
Mr. Peter, just before you do, um, while I was speaking,
the team looked up the answer to your question, um,
which was, how many PAs with a three year term are Unica?
Oh, yeah. Uh, there are three New Zealand, Nauru,
El Salvador, um, are the three in the world.
There are the others
that have a three year term are bicameral.
So Australia, Mexico,
Philippines, uh, and the United States.
It's two years. Uh, but they're all bicameral.
So there's three in the world and one of them is us. How
Many of them probably strengthens my view that, um,
since we are, uh, uni came mm-hmm.
Um, three years is probably not,
not unreasonable in my view,
but, um, I understand the reasons why people
want it, but mm-hmm.
Right, right.
Uh, our next submission is from Parliamentary Council.
Right. Sorry that you've got such a a, a short time.
We need to finish by team two just
to finish our meeting topic.
Absolutely. We're in your hands.
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.
Um, Casey Nicholson, chief Parliamentary Council
and with me is Carl Simpson,
deputy Chief Parliamentary Council
for System and Stewardship.
Um, I propose to sort of take a few minutes just
to set out our kind of five key submissions, um,
and then obviously take any questions.
Um, the context, I guess, for all of our submissions, um,
is both our focus on contributing to exercising stewardship
and New Zealand's legislation as a whole,
and to the fact that the stock
of public acts now exceeds 23 million words.
So it continues to grow by about 1 million words annually,
doubled in size since 1988.
Um, and while
as a system we are great at constantly growing the stock,
we, we turn it out.
We are not as good at maintaining it
and keeping it fit for purpose.
Um, and maintenance of legislation is critical
for enabling it to stay in place for longer.
Minimizing the impacts on the economy,
making sure it's efficient.
So essentially every piece of legislation we add needs to be
as coherent as possible, as fit for purpose as possible.
Do as much as it can as possible.
And even more, I guess every bill we would say is an
opportunity, often a missed one, to maintain the law
that's in place and to fix things up along the way.
Um, and while there are lots of challenges to doing
that good maintenance work, um,
unfortunately standing orders inadvertently,
we think sometimes create barriers
and disincentives, um, to it.
So that's really the focus of our, um, book today.
I guess the key thing here is
that uncertainty is our enemy in terms
of getting maintenance work done.
There is a lot of imperative to get the policy work done
of the government's legislative pro program,
but you need incentives
to get maintenance stuff done along the way.
'cause it takes time, takes energy,
and if that's gonna de detract from the package
of legislation, it can just not, um, not happen.
So having uncertainty about permissible content in Bills
uncertainty about Pathways
for maintenance legislation all result in it sort
of being first off the list Yep.
Effectively getting what gets done.
So, um, addressing then the sort of suggestions we've got,
all the issues we've focused on.
First up, um, single subject and on bills
and on Omnibus bill rules are probably a key one
in this pla in this space.
Um, we can, we are very much supportive of the purpose
of those rules, of giving a clear
and definable scope, ensuring the public
parliamentarians have no surprises.
They understand what is being proposed,
and they also support the parliamentary process
by ensuring they can go to single, um, select committees.
But they're affecting currently coherence
and maintenance, I think more than is necessary at times.
And the core problem, I guess we, we are arguing is
that the standing order rule two sets four, which requires
a bill to be one subject area, equates one subject area
with one principle act.
But our reality from history, from the accident
of issues ministers, um, time
and place, is that our legislation is not comprised
of a subject index like that.
It is incoherent sometimes in the acts,
and often the, there are a number of principle acts together
really result in one subject area.
I think the business committees grant leave for, uh,
expansion of some bills under the guise of, um, omnibus,
uh, to accommodate some of those
concerns that you were expressing.
Um, that does help on the omnibus rules.
But the problem we have, I guess if we focus on what the,
it's very late in the, in the past,
once you get your business committee decision,
all the work has already happened. And if people are
Not, don't worry. I'm,
I'm actually agreeing with your position. Yeah.
But, but, but on occasion, yes, yes, yes. It does.
That, that does solve the problem. It
Does solve, problem does, but it solves the
problem retrospectively
Too late for us. Yeah,
It should, yes. It should become
the, the
Norm. That's right.
Right. Thank you.
I think that's a good idea. Yeah.
Um, should I continue speaking to that please? Topic?
Yes, please. Yeah. I mean, effectively,
I'll just give you an example, a sub bill
that substantially amended the Crimes Act could pick up any
of the sort of maintenance bits of changes along the way.
Um, but the minute it also sought
to amend the Summary Offenses Act could no longer do any
maintenance changes because it's amending to principle acts.
We would say that's one subject area,
our general offenses law,
and you should be able to treat it as one subject area.
Um, we wouldn't want to undermine the concept
of it being clear what those subject areas were.
And if there was a concern that that, um, that was a sort of
hard thing to define in advance, we would suggest
that there's opportunities like the business committee
or more easily associating kind of connected rules bills,
um, could be used to give kind
of clearer in advance certainty about
what those subject unions look like.
Um, we would, I guess we would see that it to,
um, addressing much more coherent packaging
of government amendments, more effective scrutiny,
and really helping with the maintenance of legislation
that we see dropping off the list too easily at the moment.
So I'll, uh, I'll just cover our next topic,
which is regulatory system amendment bills.
So they, uh, so
regulatory system amendment bills have a growing role in
peers and maintenance of legislation.
And when used well, they enable changes
that on their own don't justify a standalone bill.
But together they warrant
legislative, legislative attention.
The moment, uh, those bills are currently a bit precarious
because their status is informal, that drives a risk
of inconsistency amongst agencies, uncertainty
about whether they'll be agreed to at business committee.
And it makes 'em more vulnerable to misuse.
And ultimately the risk is
that the house will lose confidence in the, as a vehicle.
So our proposal was
that standing orders explicitly recognize
regulatory system amendment bills as a type of omnibus bill,
but with some clear criteria.
And, uh, and at the moment continued business committee
oversight of them.
So our, our idea here is
that the standing orders could provide
that the business committee may approve
introduction if it's satisfied
that amendments are firstly capable
of broad support in the house
and secondly are not sufficiently significant in terms
of policy to warrant their own vehicle.
Um, there may also be some alternatives, uh,
that don't involve the business committee
considering each particular bill.
Um, but at the moment that's, uh, we think
that the business committee has a very significant role
and making sure that they do have
that broad support within the house.
And, uh, so that would resolve in our view some
of the main challenges they're facing,
at least at the select committee
or in the house stage for, for those bills.
The third matter, which is, uh, not quite as significant
as the other ones, but something
that we are working on at the moment is repeal of spent
and redundant local acts.
Mm-hmm. So current standing orders require local acts
to be repe repealed by local bills.
It's possible to do that
through a local legislation bill under Appendix
C of the standing orders.
But that requires sponsorship
of the Minister for local Government.
There hasn't been a local legislation bill for many years.
Uh, there are about 500 local acts.
And the work, uh, that PCO o's leading at the moment shows
that, uh, hundreds of those are obsolete or spent.
And we are working on a process to engage
with local government to actually create a list of, uh,
local, uh, local acts to repeal. Um, and that
Will take a very long time, um, to, would it be better to
present that list to Parliament?
We we're making really good progress
with local authorities at the moment.
They're actually quite engaged
and we've, we are, we are working through that.
We're expecting to have a bill ready, um, for,
for introduction Oh, okay.
To cover that, uh, either very late in this term
or early the next term.
Um, but that work, uh,
requires at the moment a local legislation repeals bill
or a local legislation bill led by the, uh,
the Minister of local government.
We think that a government bill should be able to repeal
or amend local acts that are obsolete or spent,
or, um, if that's too far, the, the possibility could be
that a, a another minister could sponsor a a, a repeal, uh,
legislation for the local legislation
Such as the Attorney General,
Such as the Attorney General
or the Minister for Regulation.
Um, uh, our sort
of fourth submission really is about bills with mixed public
and private purposes.
Um, I guess our point here is that, um,
the current classification to public
and private bills doesn't cater for all the bills
that we see with mixed purposes.
Um, in particular prevents parliament from considering bills
easily through a standing orders route, um,
that combine public policy with ancillary private benefits.
Um, we recommend that standing orders allow such bills, um,
or expressly live
and our hybrid bills with, with some safeguards
and stepping through that.
We do appreciate that recent rulings, um,
have clarified the application of current rules.
Um, but we think that the purpose
of the current rules probably doesn't need the rigidity
that the current, that the, um,
study orders currently provide on this.
As we understand the purpose
of the classification into public versus private is
to limit the risk of the private powers, benefits,
or exclusions as a result of sort
of lobbying or special pleadings.
And to prevent that kind of being part of the, um,
well connected entities
and being the house's business being caught up in that way.
Um, and as a matter of principle, the house should be slow
to make laws that, um, apply only to specific purposes
or the benefit of specific persons.
We certainly wouldn't want to undermine that principle,
but it, it is possible for bills to need
to straddle that category.
And we do think it would be better for standing orders
to allow for that possibility.
Um, other legislatures do, um, allow for that in some ways.
Um, the, the UK has a quite a potentially complex
system of hybrid bills.
Um, but Canada will, um, allocate bills
that have a public policy purpose
with ancillary private benefits as public
and treat 'em as public bills.
Um, our idea would be to allow public bills
to provide a benefit
or exemption for private interest if it's
provided as a matter of public policy
and it's ancillary to the, to the bill's purpose
and that those can't be introduced late.
So that if they need to be, because a key point is that, um,
and it's kind of the point that the protections
and appendix see do, right?
I think it's app they do right now is that they allow,
they make sure that people have got notice of what
that private interest is so that they can, um,
submit to select committee.
So we would say that any kind of exemption
or benefit to private individuals needs to be referred back
to a select committee or ensure it has select committee
consideration to give that opportunity for people to, um,
put their views on it. And, and
That's much like, uh, it's an
interesting, um, proposition.
I don't disagree that it should be something clearer
that Clark and I, on that particular building you talk of,
had long discussions, um,
before, um, was able to come to a position which
the clerk clearly advised on how to do that,
but had had at the same time, uh,
concern about the provisions
that were in existing standing audit.
So my point here is that, uh, my,
my driving point there too was that sometimes it's very hard
to say that something is, uh,
exclusively a private benefit.
Mm-hmm. Uh, when in fact the, the, in this case,
'cause it was infrastructure projects were very much
of public, uh, benefit.
So if, if you could come up with some words
that would advise us on that, that would be good.
That I was gonna ask on all of your more points mm-hmm.
If you, um, we, we may or may not pick them up,
but it'd be interesting from your points of view to
perhaps give us a suggestion as to
what standing orders might
Look like. Yeah. Would be very happy.
Yeah.
We, we'd draft something on that
to draft something. Yes. That's
Alright. Is that, is that alright
Clark?
I don't want to, uh, cut across your team's expertise.
Yeah. Um, the very last point is a very minor suggestion,
which is to formalize PCOS role on drafting local
and private bills and standing orders.
And we just think that would improve clarity for, um, people
who do those kinds of bills that they, um, need to engage
with PCO in advance of introduction.
Um, but really I any
of just really wanna see if there's any questions off the,
um, committee on those.
It was very sub substantial, so be happy with that.
Thank you. And we'll obviously good points if you are able
to give us something that you think might be worth,
we will obviously want to discuss those with you.
We'll be very pleased to. Thank you very much. Thank
You very much for your time. Okay.
Now
where's this next one on here?
All the, uh, parliamentary commissioner for the environment
in your hands?
Uh, ley.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Um, can I just introduce Matt Patterson,
who's my chief policy advisor
and Rebecca Forley, who is my general counsel
who has a public law, uh, background,
who keeps me straight on these issues.
Look, thank you for finding a few uh, minutes for me.
Um, if you've read the submission,
you'll know what I've said.
I'd just like to stress three points
and then if you have some questions,
by all means we'd be happy to help.
Um, the, the first point, uh, is, um, that
we've been doing a lot of work, um, on
what we call outcome reporting, uh, on the environment and,
and, and looking at environmental expenditure, um,
across a range of agencies.
Uh, and we produce an estimate of environmental expenditure.
Um, so this is not about policy.
This is just about what are the numbers,
how can you interrogate them other than
through an agency lens, a departmental lens, the whole
of the Public Finance Act
and all of your procedures are set up around scrutinizing
agencies and in some cases
that's the most sensible thing to do.
Um, but there are quite a few areas of expenditure
of which environment is one where
what governments are seeking to do is
to achieve outcomes which run right across the country
and enlist multiple agencies.
And I don't think your scrutiny system, uh,
is ideally tuned to that.
So what I'm suggesting is that this committee takes,
um, a close interest in the work of the finance
and expenditure committee,
which is actually looking at this very subject.
Um, we've made a submission to that committee,
but you'll be aware, they're, they're looking at, uh,
how we can improve scrutiny.
Uh, and one of the things they've specifically identified is
looking at outcomes.
All the work I've done has been done very closely
with the audit office.
Uh, the audit general is very supportive
of what we are trying to do.
It's not a question of replacing the work that they do that,
that you do as a parliament in looking at the, the, the,
the appropriations and the agencies.
But you don't spend that money
because you want to have an agency.
You spend the money 'cause you're after an outcome.
And in the environment, whether it's water,
whether it's climate, whether it's pollution
or whatever, uh, it really, you need the means to look
beyond individual agencies.
So what, what I'm suggesting, uh, uh, I,
and I don't have drafting instructions for you.
I think you need to talk to finance
and expenditure, see what they're saying, look at
what we've done, and then see how you can, uh,
make standing orders a bit more user-friendly from looking
at things from an outcome point of view.
You'll see I made a suggestion that maybe, um,
that in the scrutiny, uh, week,
and I think it's an excellent innovation,
what that's happened there.
But one of the things might be to, to say
that committees must choose one cross cutting, uh, subject,
or at least where that's where that's relevant.
Um, because, you know, select committees are
where the executive is held to account, not just
for did the money get spent as the appropriation required,
but did it actually achieve the end
that they said it was gonna achieve?
Could it have been done differently?
Could it have been done better? So that's the first point.
The second point concerns, um,
the way legislation reaches the statute book, uh, acceptance
of parliament's Laws relies in pass on the way
legislation reaches the statute book.
And if people feel they haven't had a chance
to have their concerns heard
and tested, I think their confidence in our fundamental
democratic contract is undermined.
And as commissioner of the environment, I'm seeing a lot
of environmental legislation
and I just wanted to say to the committee, remember, it,
it it, it relates to assets which are actually owned
by the people of New Zealand.
They're not private. The, the water, the coastlines,
the biodiversity, these, these are public assets
and there is a public interest in them.
This is the only place
that people can come to make their point.
And so if you bypass
or truncates committee processes using urgency
or using making undue recourse to urgency, I really think
as the person who's got a,
I've got a view on this place over some decades,
I I really think you undermine, uh,
public confidence in the institution.
I've got one practical suggestion,
which I think you could consider standing orders.
And that is that if urgency is used to push something
through in a way that avoids scrutiny, then one requirement
that you could write understanding orders is that, in
that case, there should be a requirement
for ex exposed examination of the bill,
which has been passed under urgency by way
of sort committee inquiry.
So it's expost and the thing is law,
but there is an opportunity, uh, to hear
what people have got to say on that.
The third point I'd like to make to you, um,
concerns the situation where you have a bill
with too many submissions and not enough time.
Now look, the best will in the world, this will happen.
Uh, and there are occasions where you already have to, uh,
decide how are you gonna cope with that?
How are you gonna triage the submissions?
And again, I don't come with drafting suggestions,
but it's our view that it might be helpful
if standing orders gave some guidance on what
to do in those situations.
So if a committee is confronting a huge number
of submissions, it hasn't got the time to deal with them,
it would be helpful if standing order said, here are some
of the things that you, the options you've got for,
for triaging those submissions so that there is transparency
and confidence that the process whereby certain people were
asked to appear and other ones weren't.
It's transparent, it's in the standing orders rather than
having to make it up as you go along.
So those are the three points. Um, I'd like to make.
I make them as your servant.
Uh, we try to work for, uh, all parliamentarians
and we spend a lot of time helping, um, select committees
and appearing in front of select committees.
Um, so it's slightly unusual,
unlike perhaps my two other colleagues.
I'm actually on the receiving end as a submitter
and I understand the frustration
that sometimes boils up, uh, in the public.
So I hope those are useful
suggestions. Question,
Um, I'm sorry I answer the question,
but, um, the issues you raised, we've already sort of, uh,
started in this very early stage
to recognize those exact points.
Um, and uh, we've asked for more information to come to us.
Um, we've, we've been supplied
with significant information on the use of agency,
although I was just checking it there
and see a couple things.
We've gotta ask more questions, right.
Um, uh,
and then there's the whole, the whole dilemma of the amount
of submissions that come into select committees
and how you triage that.
So this, this parliament particularly, uh, it's been, uh,
someone give the numbers of 600,000, 600,000
so far just in this, this two year term.
Yeah. It's very difficult to, uh, it
Is, it Is, uh, to to meet the public expectation Yeah.
As well as the, as well as we've discussed earlier, ensuring
that those have got a more expert position to Yeah.
I sort found Yes. Are there other questions that Yes.
Um, nice to see you.
I was just thinking in terms of the outcomes, um, scrutiny.
Mm. Are you reflecting
what happens in a similar Westminster Parliament?
Have you seen this elsewhere?
Or you're just seeing it as a problem that we are facing?
No, it's, it's, uh, I haven't,
I'm not looking at o overseas experience at all.
Of course, you know, you'll appreciate that we are,
we are quite one exceptional end anyhow,
just being unicameral and only having one shot at it.
Uh, so in other places they've got more resource
and more opportunities through two
chambers and so on to do stuff.
Um, so, uh, no, the answer is no.
I should tell the committee though, and, uh, Mr.
Speaker knows this, I, uh, attended, um, in fact,
at the suggestion of the auditor general, I went to a, uh,
world Audit Union meeting where it's a un body,
but they bring together auditors general from all countries,
uh, and presented to them earlier this year on this.
Um, no one, uh, in the room said, oh, we're doing that.
I, I think it's as genuinely innovative.
We, we will just be giving parliament the fifth edition
in, uh, a month or two.
If you haven't seen it, you should take a look
because it, it's, it's, we, we rely on the goodwill
of government departments who've been very helpful
and we can tell you broken out into, uh, six major
outcomes, which are not party political.
They're things which everyone agrees with.
You know, like doing something about water,
doing something about pollution, so on and so forth.
We can tell you how across all of government
that money gets allocated to those big broad outcomes.
And then we can break down a little bit below that.
So if a committee wants to say, we want to look at
security and we can pull together
M-P-I-M-F-E Doc Lins, we can pull
that information together in an integrated way.
So rather than looking, oh,
how much did we spend through Lins?
It's, well, what did the government put into this
horizontal trash?
And then get the four of them in
and question the four of them.
I, I think we need to be a bit more innovative.
'cause government is very integrated and complex,
but our public finance act
and our standing orders still focused very much on agencies.
Yeah. It's a problem with the, we've been reflecting on
that earlier that, um, the amount of, the change of the,
the pace of change, I suppose you'd say is up.
So is you'd be well aware some
of those bills are now 30 years old Yeah.
As profession's 30, 40 years old. Yes. Um,
Go a hand up.
Um, no, sorry.
Um, just wanna get back to that, um, that,
that scrutiny idea in terms of sort of outcome scrutiny,
which isn't without its criticisms in terms of, you know,
just whatever you want to,
whenever you're planning to quantify, um,
something in a prescribed manner,
by definition you are leaving out other,
of course valuable pieces of information.
So do you see any risks in that
or could you conceive of it more in terms of that sort of
mission accountability?
So it's not it's outcomes,
but it, it's a little bit more acknowledged that it,
that it, that it sways across various entities.
Um, so it could take into a bit more of a qualitative
or a bit more of an ethical,
or there'd be other things
that weren't just hard fast targets?
Well, the, uh, well, no,
we're not looking at targets. We, we are looking at
Or outcomes, which generally,
Um, no, no. The,
the the, they're by definition not, not targets.
Targets. Yeah. I mean, a target is a, is a thing if,
if if the, if the general outcome for New Zealanders,
we want to protect and conserve our biodiversity.
If all parties in parliament say that they agree on
that, that's not contentious.
A government may have a target of we want to, uh,
reduce predation by four-legged things with two i's
by from X to Y, that's a target.
Mm-hmm. And that would be potentially
something which you would want
to look at on a cross departmental basis
because, you know, uh, a lot defense, for instance,
if you look at the, the, uh, our piece of work, I mean,
they do actually quite a lot of work on biodiversity.
Mm-hmm. That is all part of a government effort. Mm-hmm.
One question I would always ask if as member of partner,
are you talking to anybody over there?
Do you know what they're doing? How does it integrate?
So it's, that is really the purpose of it.
I I don't think there's risk.
I think it's just, it's a different lens
and it's a different way of bringing
information together. Yeah.
So it's a different lens at the beginning
rather than a Oh,
Absolutely. Prescribed
Or, yeah. Set. Yes.
Yes. Did you want to No,
Just if I might make a quick comment and a question,
and thanks for referencing.
FEC as you've said. Yes. Yes. Trying to look at this.
Do you think and, and don't, I, I'm basically in agreement
'cause I think the silos of government do my head in, um,
often because we aren't looking
at outcomes or getting outcomes.
But do you think, I'm just trying to think
of a practical way to trial this maybe, or
because I'm doing it. Yeah.
But I'm sorry, but we, we are actually
Doing this, but I'm thinking
through the select committee processes.
Maybe we could have some of the, some select committees
jointly think about some things that they could scrutinize
Well, yes.
I mean we, we, we have done this look, um, uh, and,
and you could use joint select committees Yeah.
Or one select committee, which has an interest.
Um, could, could, could do it.
I mean we've, we did a trial in the last year
of the last parliament
and we suggested they tried out our numbers
and we chose water.
Um, yeah. Just, and we pulled in,
I think five chief executives
and the select committee asked some questions.
I'm not, that's before
the scrutiny changes had come through.
I'm not sure how successful it was,
but I'll tell you this, it was quite clear to me
that not all of those chief
executives knew what the other ones were doing.
And it wasn't itself almost a therapeutic exercise Yeah.
To pull 'em together. And so
if you start asking questions about a, a broad area,
you know, of activity, uh, which relates to one
of these outcomes and identify,
and we, we, we produced the, I'll send you the document.
We, we produced all of the links.
It is, when you ask that question,
those people actually have to find out what's going on.
No, I applaud you for your work,
but I'm just trying to think in
that select committee scrutiny process,
how we actually would make it work.
Well, because the issue is
that obviously different select committees have different
responsibilities for different agencies
and we actually want like exactly like you say, yes.
You want all of those agencies in one room. Yes. Yes.
I'm just trying to think through Yeah. How we could,
I think our suggestion in, in here is, is that
you get a select committee to pick an outcome.
Uh, and it might be in an area
where they've got the majority of the agencies
that they're scrutinizing,
but they will have to call in some others.
So that Water one Yeah.
Was done by the Environment committee and NPI had to come in
because NPI do a lot on water.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and but there,
there wouldn't be anything stopping No.
A a, the environment committee doing that
during scrutiny week.
Yeah. Now, um, it's NPI have to be available anyway. Mm-hmm.
Um, that the only slight problem is environment production.
It's weird that I, I totally agree.
It's the same time, but it's usually though the outcome
you're wanting to unpack actually
across could be four or five. Oh,
That's the whole idea. Correct.
That's the whole idea. I'm just trying to think
how we could encourage that agencies
and several SL committees.
Correct. And that's the thing,
and I don't, I think we can get there,
but Matrix take a bit of,
Alright. Can
I thank you very much for giving time.
Thank you for your insights valuable as always.
We wish you well and, uh,
Continue at our work.
But, uh, day one, it's been, uh, quite, quite engaging.
Thank you very much.